Client Implementation 
You will client program client.py to connect to the server, specifying the hostname and port 
number of the server to connect to. 
• When the client program starts up, the client can issue any request (even unrecognizable ones) 
to the server, but is expected to issue the JOIN request immediately with the client’s username 
using alphanumeric characters so as to be able to use the services provided by the server. 
• When desired, the client will send a LIST request to the server to see who is currently 
subscribed to the service, but only the registered client will receive the listing (i.e., others will 
receive an error message with JOIN request instructions). 
• When desired, the client will send a MESG or BCST request to the server who will then relay 
that message to an individual registered client or all registered clients, respectively. 
• When desired, the client will send a LOG request to the server to check the history of messages 
sent and received by the same client. 
• The client may voluntarily leave the service at any time by issuing the QUIT request. 
Your program (i.e., a server program) should run on the INET domain using SOCK_STREAM 
(i.e., TCP) sockets so that the server and client execute on different ECS machines at the same 
time. The server will accept the port number to communicate on as an argument to the server 
program. Your code will handle errors appropriately, such as printing an error message, 
disconnecting the client, or termination of the program. 
3 
CSC138 
Computer Network Fundamentals 
Summer 2026 
Securing User Login (Optional Bonus Task ) 
You can extend your project to include the below feature to earn up to 5 bonus points. The 
following task will replace the “JOIN” command in your code with “REGISTER” and “LOGIN” 
commands. Following are the requirements for securing user authentication. 
Client-end Implementation Update 
• The client must provide an interface that allows a new user to register by entering a 
username and password. During login, the client must allow an existing user to enter their 
username and password and send these credentials to the server for verification. 
• The client should treat usernames exactly as entered by the user for display purposes, but 
it must understand that the server will enforce uniqueness in a case-insensitive manner. 
This means a user should not be able to create an account with a username that matches an 
existing username in any letter case. 
• The client must also display appropriate responses received from the server, such as 
successful registration, successful login, invalid credentials, duplicate username, or 
account lock notification. If the account is locked after repeated failed login attempts, the 
client should inform the user that access is denied until the lockout period expires. 