Server Implementation: 
    • The server will set up as a chat server and establish a socket connection using a port number 
passed in as an argument to the program. For example, the server code may be executed as 
follows:  
python3 server.py <svr_port> 
    • The server will print out a usage statement and terminate the program if the user does not enter 
the command with the port as the command-line argument. 
    • The server will support up to and including 10 “registered” client connections. Although more 
than 10 clients can connect to the server, no more than 10 clients may be registered in the 
database at the same time. In the case of more than 10 clients attempting to register, the server 
will print out an error message and simply close the connection. Note that clients may come 
and go as they please, so if, for example, the 10th client “leaves” the service, space is now 
made available for another client to register. 
    • The server will set up a network socket (i.e., AF_INET) over TCP (i.e., SOCK_STREAM) 
using the port number passed in as an argument to the program. 

    o The server will bind and listen to the port specified as a command-line argument. When 
a client connects, a new thread will be spawned to handle the socket using POSIX 
threads (i.e., pthreads) in Linux. 
    o The server will support the following case-sensitive commands which are all sent as 
plain ASCII text: 

    ▪ JOIN <username>: When a client wants to join (i.e., register for) the service, 
it first connects to the server command with the hostname of the server CSE 
machine and the port number, and then sends a JOIN request with the username. 
Usernames will only consist of alphanumeric characters and will not contain 
spaces or other “special” or control characters. You may assume that the user 
follows this requirement for alphanumeric characters, so no validation is 
needed. If the database is “full” (i.e., 10 clients have registered for the service), 
then the server will print out a status message and send a “Too Many Users” 
message to the client. Once a client has already registered with a JOIN request, 
any subsequent JOIN requests from the same registered client will be discarded 
with a status message sent back to the client. 

    ▪ LIST: If a registered client wants to know who is currently subscribed to the 
service, the client will issue a LIST request. Upon receipt of the LIST request, 
the server will send a list of all registered clients on individual lines and return 
this list (newlines and all) to the client. Note that the client must be registered 
for the service to receive any “services”, such as this one, provided by the 
server. In this program, the registration is equivalent to joining the server using 
username. 

    ▪ MESG <username> <some_message_text> : If a registered client wants to 
send an individual message to another registered client, the client will issue 
the MESG request with the username of a registered client followed by 
whatever message he/she wants to send to the other registered client. The 
server will then act as a relay and forward this message to the registered user. 
Note that the client must be registered for the service to receive any 
“services”, such as this one, provided by the server. If the client who is not 
registered for this service sends a MESG request, the server will print out a 
status message and send an “Unregistered User” message to the client with the 
JOIN request instructions. If a registered client sends a MESG request to an 
unregistered client, the server will print out a status message and send an 
“Unknown Recipient” message to the client. 

    ▪ BCST <some_message_text>: If a registered client wants to broadcast a 
message to all other registered clients, the client will issue the BCST request 
followed by whatever message he/she wants to send to the other registered 
clients. The server will then act as a relay and forward this message to the 
registered users (but not the sender). Note that the client must be registered for 
the service to receive any “services”, such as this one, provided by the server.  

    ▪ QUIT: When a connected client wants to leave the service, the client will issue 
a QUIT request, at which time the server will disconnect the client from the 
service. The database entry for registered clients should be removed after the 
client has been disconnected. Note that an unregistered client will still be 
disconnected from the service (i.e., their connection closed) with a status 
message at the server, though no data needs to be removed form the database 
since there is none for that client. 

    ▪ LOG : This command will allow a client to retrieve a history of all messages 
sent and received during their session. Upon issuing the LOG command, the 
server should respond by displaying the stored chat history in a structured 
format, including timestamps, sender, receiver (if applicable), and message 
content. The log should be maintained in a text-based format on the server, 
ensuring messages persist throughout the session. For this, the server can create 
a file for each client connecting to the server. If client logs put and logs back in, 
the server should search for the client file and update the history of messages. 

    ▪ Idle Timer: The chat server must automatically monitor client activity and 
enforce an inactivity timeout. If no message is received from a connected client 
for one minute, the server should disconnect that client. The disconnection 
should release all related resources and notify other users in the chat room. A 
warning or log message should be displayed on the server console indicating 
that the client was removed due to inactivity. 

    ▪ Unrecognized Messages: If a registered client sends an unrecognizable request 
(i.e., one not supported by this protocol), the server will print out a status 
message and send an “Unknown Message” message to the client. 

    • The server will provide important status updates of messages sent and received, such as 
connection events and received requests, identifying the client using their socket file 
descriptor. 

    • The server will support error checking across all relevant system calls and other potential 
issues.


Server-side Implementation Update  
    • The server must support secure user registration and authentication. During registration, 
the server must accept a username and password from the client and ensure that the 
username is unique in a case-insensitive manner. For example, if Alice is already 
registered, then usernames such as “alice” or “ALICE” must also be rejected. 
    • The server must store user credentials securely by saving only the hashed version of the 
password, not the plaintext password. During login, the server must verify whether the 
username exists and compare the hash of the entered password against the stored hash 
associated with that username. Access should be granted only when both the username and 
password match correctly. 
    • The server must also implement protection against brute-force login attempts. If a user 
enters incorrect credentials three consecutive times, the server must temporarily lock that 
account for one hour. During this lockout period, all login attempts for that account must 
be denied. Once the one-hour period has passed, the server should allow the user to try 
logging in again. 